Explain royalty reimbursement and single-pass edit over full text (#2)
ARR4N/EIPs: EIPS/eip-TBD.md

---
title: On-chain NFT royalty enforcement

> description: Hello world

Reviewer: should we put a brief description here, or remove?

Reviewer 2: I'll add one before sending off the PR.

Author: Added

author: David Huber (@cxkoda), Arran Schlosberg (@aschlosberg)
discussions-to: <URL>
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-09-25
requires: 165, 721
---

## Abstract

> We describe a mechanism for which, upon transfer of an [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) Non-Fungible Token (NFT), the dominant strategy of the new owner is to truthfully reveal if the owning entity has changed and, if so, (a) report their valuation of the token and (b) pay a creator-specified royalty based on said valuation.

Reviewer: Why the a) b)? I'd remove since we never need to reference.

Author: Done.

I tend to put them in in case others want to reference them, but I agree that it's unnecessary here.

## Motivation

While [ERC-2981](./eip-2981.md) introduced a standard for contracts to signal a royalty amount to be paid to the creator upon sale of an NFT, it doesn't describe a means of enforcement.
It goes so far as to state that "payment must be voluntary, as transfer mechanisms… \[do\] not always imply a sale occurred".

The difficulty with on-chain enforcement stems from the incomplete information available to enforcement contracts.
Such contracts are unaware of both the nature of token transfers (e.g. sale, private, gift, etc.) and any corresponding flow of funds (e.g. sales price), which are commonly needed to compute the royalty to be paid to the creator.

> Until now, contracts have therefore relied on external parties to supply this information, which can either introduce centralisation, or be manipulated if the involved parties are dishonest.

Reviewer: Not sure about the "until now". This sentence was intended as a consequence of the former.

Author: Removed. I'm leaving the rest as is so it's both a consequence of the former and also a reference to the historical status quo.

We describe a game-theoretic mechanism that targets the primary actors in a transfer (i.e. the previous and new token owner) as the only players, and induce them to truthfully supply the information required for enforcement.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

For each `tokenId` we introduce a set of addresses whose members MAY transfer the token to themselves without payment by calling `TBD()`, which we will refer to as a *take-back*.
The set MUST be initially empty.
For every ERC-721 transfer, *except* for initial mint, the set of the corresponding `tokenId` MUST be appended with the previous owner (i.e. the transfer's `from` address).

Royalty payment by the new token owner MUST be accepted by the token contract via a dedicated function, `TBD()`.
Upon receipt of royalties, the take-back set MUST be emptied (i.e. transfer permissions collapse back to standard ERC-721 rules).

> After each token transfer, there SHOULD be a grace period during which the token is frozen and take-backs are disabled to allow the new owner to decide whether to either pay the royalty or allow the take-back set to grow.

Reviewer: Do you still need to use "either" if you already have "whether"?

Author: Not strictly necessary but it aids the reader in knowing that there's a binary split coming up, instead of them realising this halfway through the sentence. It's like using a `switch` instead of a series of `if else`; same end goal but better signalling of intent.

Reviewer: I think I've just never seen `whether to either`. To me both signal "one of the following".

In addition to clearing the take-back set, receipt of royalties MUST begin a temporary window during which *any* address MAY purchase the token for a price that is a function of the royalty received (which can be viewed as the inverse of the `royaltyInfo()` function of ERC-2981).
This process is referred to as *auto-listing* and is not limited to addresses in the take-back set.
The token MUST NOT be transferrable for the duration of the auto-listing.
Implementations MAY specify the duration of the auto-listing window at their discretion but it MUST be finite and SHOULD be long enough to allow arbitrage opportunities to be detected and, after expiration, transfer permissions MUST collapse back to standard ERC-721 rules.

> In the event of a sale due to an auto-listing, (a) the corresponding royalties MUST be reimbursed, (b) the auto-listing price MUST be transferred to the token owner (i.e. the same address receives both the royalties and the sale price), and (c) the token MUST be transferred to the address paying the price.

Reviewer: use an actual listing or remove the numbering since we never reference.

Author: Done

Author: I used an actual (numeric) list so it's easier for implementooors to refer to it.

> In the event of a sale due to an auto-listing, (a) the corresponding royalties MUST be reimbursed, (b) the auto-listing price MUST be transferred to the token owner (i.e. the same address receives both the royalties and the sale price), and (c) the token MUST be transferred to the address paying the price.

Reviewer: rearranging the points to make it clearer who the previous owner is
```suggestion
In the event of a sale due to an auto-listing, the token MUST be transferred to the address paying the auto-listing price, the price MUST be transferred to the previous token owner and the previously paid royalties MUST be reimbursed (i.e. the same address receives both the royalties and the sale price).
```

Author: Done. Not committing the suggestion directly as I've made some other changes related to the earlier comments.

The new owner MUST be subject to the same mechanism rules; i.e. take-back, royalty payment, and auto-listing.
If no sale occurs during the auto-listing window, the contract SHOULD transfer the royalty payment to the NFT creator.

Marketplaces facilitating sales SHOULD forward royalties in the same transaction as the sale to guarantee payment within the grace period.

> Marketplaces MAY allow buyers to configure either the auto-listing price or the royalties paid (as they are equivalent), or they MAY provide sensible default values at their discretion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Marketplaces MAY allow buyers to configure either the auto-listing price or the royalties paid (as they are equivalent), or they MAY provide sensible default values, or employ more sophisticate algorithms and heuristics at their discretion.
```

Author: Done but without algorithms, just "heuristics" because that simplifies the sentence yet still captures the essence of what you're trying to say.

> If allowing buyers to configure values, marketplaces SHOULD limit this to the auto-listing price for ease of understanding as royalties are effectively calculated on this value.

Reviewer: I'd maybe remove this or change to RECOMMEND, since we can't foresee what they will come up with

Author: RECOMMENDED has the same definition as SHOULD
